---

title: Introduction
category: docs
layout: default
toc:
  - { title: Getting started, anchor: getting_started }
  - { title: CSS transitions, anchor: css_transitions }
  - { title: Code repository, anchor: code_repository }
  - { title: Acknowledgments, anchor: acknowledgments }
  - { title: Changelog, anchor: changelog }
  - { title: License, anchor: license }

---

Masonry is a dynamic grid layout script. Think of it as the flip-side of CSS floats. Whereas floating arranges elements horizontally then vertically, Masonry arranges elements vertically, positioning each element in the next open spot in the grid. The result minimizes vertical gaps between elements of varying height, just like a mason fitting stones in a wall.

## Getting started



### Markup

Masonry works on a container element with a group of similar child items.

{% highlight html %}

<div id="container">
  <div class="item">...</div>
  <div class="item">...</div>
  <div class="item">...</div>
  ...
</div>

{% endhighlight %}

Add the Masonry script.

{% highlight html %}

<script src="/path/to/masonry.min.js"></script>

{% endhighlight %}

### CSS

All sizing of items is handled by your CSS. Items should be floated.

{% highlight css %}

.item {
  width: 220px;
  margin: 10px;
  float: left;
}

{% endhighlight %}

### Script

Initialize a Masonry instance with `new Masonry( element, options )`. The Masonry constructor accepts two arguments.

1. The container element
2. An options object

Set `columnWidth` to set the width of columns in the layout grid. There are a number of other [options](options.html) you can specify.

{% highlight javascript %}

window.onload = function() {
  var wall = new Masonry( document.getElementById('container'), {
    columnWidth: 240
  });
};

{% endhighlight %}

That's it!

[**See Demo: Basic multi-column**](../demos/basic-multi-column.html)

## CSS transitions

You can animate layout rearrangements on CSS3 transitions. In your CSS, add transition styles below. The Masonry plugin will add a class of `masonry` to the container after the first arrangement so transitions can be applied afterward. Item elements will have a class of `masonry-brick` added.

{% highlight css %}
/**** Transitions ****/

.masonry,
.masonry .masonry-brick {
  -webkit-transition-duration: 0.7s;
     -moz-transition-duration: 0.7s;
      -ms-transition-duration: 0.7s;
       -o-transition-duration: 0.7s;
          transition-duration: 0.7s;
}

.masonry {
  -webkit-transition-property: width, height;
     -moz-transition-property: width, height;
      -ms-transition-property: width, height;
       -o-transition-property: width, height;
          transition-property: width, height;
}

.masonry .masonry-brick {
  -webkit-transition-property: left, right, top;
     -moz-transition-property: left, right, top;
      -ms-transition-property: left, right, top;
       -o-transition-property: left, right, top;
          transition-property: left, right, top;
}
{% endhighlight %}

## Code repository

This project lives on GitHub at [github.com/desandro/vanilla-masonry](http://github.com/desandro/vanilla-masonry). There you can grab the latest code and follow development.

## Acknowledgments

My thanks go out to following developers, whose work was integral in making Masonry lightweight and cross-browser compatible.

+ **John Resig** for cross-browser addEvent, removeEvent functions
+ [**Dustin Diaz**](http://dustindiaz.com/) for add/remove class function in bonzo
+ **The jQuery team** for the `getWH` helper function within jQuery
+ **John Hann** for debouncing

## Changelog

<dl>
  <dt>v1.0: Nov 2011</dt>
    <dd>Original release</dd>
</dl>

## License

Vanilla Masonry is licensed under the MIT license. It may be used for personal and commercial applications.

<div class="license-copy">
  <h3>The MIT License</h3>
  <p>Copyright &copy; 2011 David DeSandro</p>
  <p>Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:</p>
  <p>The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.</p>
  <p>THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.</p>
</div>
